# Oracle Pool v2.0 

* Author: @scalahub, @greenhat, @kettlebell, @SethDusek
* Status: Proposed
* Created: 07-Sep-2021
* License: CC0
* Forking: not needed

This is a proposed update to the oracle pool v1.0 currently deployed and documented in [EIP16](https://github.com/ergoplatform/eips/blob/eip16/eip-0016.md).

## Contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
    - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    - [Reward Mechanism](#reward-mechanism)
    - [Refresh Mechanism](#refresh-mechanism)
    - [Update Mechanism](#update-mechanism)
- [Tokens](#tokens)
- [Boxes](#boxes)
- [Contracts](#contracts)
    - [Pool Contract](#pool-contract)
    - [Refresh Contract](#refresh-contract)
    - [Oracle Contract](#oracle-contract)
    - [Ballot Contract](#ballot-contract)
    - [Update Contract](#update-contract)
- [Trasactions](#transactions)
    - [Refresh Pool](#refresh-pool)
    - [Publish Data Point](#publish-data-point)
    - [Extract Reward Tokens](#extract-reward-tokens)
    - [Transfer Oracle Token](#transfer-oracle-token)
    - [Vote for Update](#vote-for-update)
    - [Update Pool Box](#update-pool-box)
        - [Update Rules](#update-rules)
    - [Transfer Ballot Token](#transfer-ballot-token)

## Introduction
In order to motivate the changes proposed in this document, consider the drawbacks of Oracle pool v1.0:

1. Rewards generate a lot of dust
2. Current rewards are too low (related to 1)
3. There are two types of pool boxes. This makes dApps and update mechanism more complex
4. Oracle tokens are non-transferable, and so oracles are locked permanently. The same goes with ballot tokens.

Oracle pool v2.0 aims to address the above. 

Below is a summary of the main new features in v2.0 and how it differs from v1.0.

- **Single pool address**: This version of the pool will have only one address, the *pool address*. 
- **Epoch counter**: Pool box will additionally store a counter that is incremented on each collection. This will allow more sophisticated dApps. 
- **Compact pool box**: Pool box is separated from the logic of pool management, which is captured instead in a **refresh** box. This makes the pool box very small for use in other dApps.
- **Refresh box**: The refresh box is used for collecting data-points.   
- **Reward in tokens**: The posting reward will be in the form of tokens instead of Ergs. These tokens can be redeemed separately, which is not part of the protocol.
  The pool box emits such reward tokens.
- **No separate funding process**: The pool box emits only reward tokens and won't be handing out Ergs. Thus, there won't be a separate funding process required.
- **Reward accumulated**: We will not be creating a new box for rewarding each posting to prevent dust. Instead, the rewards will be accumulated directly in the oracle boxes. 
- **Oracle boxes spent in collection**: Because the rewards must be accumulated, the oracle boxes will be considered as inputs rather than data-inputs when collecting individual rates for averaging. 
  These inputs will be spent, and a copy of the box with the reward will be created. 
  This gives us the ability to accumulate rewards, while keeping the transaction size similar to when using them as data-inputs in v1.0.
  Additionally, this allows us to outsource part of the reward logic to the oracle boxes.
   
  **Note:** The pool box will still be used as data input in other dApps.
- **Transferable oracle tokens**: Oracle tokens are free to be transferred between public keys.
- **Similar update mechanism**: We will have the similar update mechanism as in v1.0 (threshold number of ballot token holders must vote for an update).
- **Transferable ballot tokens**: Similar to oracle tokens, the ballot tokens are free to be transferred between public keys.

### Prerequisites

The design below has some default parameters proposed for the ERG/USD oracle pool.

If you want to run your own pool, for example, to serve a different pair, then the following parameters need to be decided.

|Parameter|Symbol in code|Default value|Meaning|
|---|---|---|---|
|Epoch period|**epochLength**|30|The number of blocks for which a rate is locked in the pool box. <br /> Each block is 2 mins on average <br /> For a fast changing rate, use shorter value (such as 5)| 
|Buffer| **buffer** | 4 | The max error allowed in the declared start height of new a epoch <br /> Ideally, this should be the height at which tx gets mined <br /> However, due to congestion, we allow this error margin|
|Total oracles|  | 15 | The total number of oracles allowed to post data points <br> An oracle can post at most one data point at any time |
|Minimum data points| **minDataPoints** | 4 | The minimum number of fresh data points needed to refresh pool box <br /> A data point is fresh if it has been posted in the last **epochLength** blocks|
|Maximum deviation percent| **maxDeviationPercent** | 5 | Maximum allowed difference between the first and last data points <br /> in terms of the first data point <br /> Data points are sorted in increasing order|
|Total ballots|  | 15 | The total number of people allowed to vote for an update |
|Minimum votes| **minVotes** | 6 | The minimum votes needed to update pool params (any of the above)|

Once the parameters are decided, generate the [tokens](#tokens) in the correct quantity and update the values in the [contracts](#contracts).
Next, find the right number of trusted oracles and ballot holders and distribute the tokens to them.  

### Reward Mechanism 

In v1.0, the pool was responsible for rewarding each oracle for posting a data-point. In v2.0, the pool simply certifies that a data-point was posted, and a separate reward mechanism is proposed. This keeps the contract smaller and more flexible.

The certificates are in the form of tokens emitted by the pool box. Thus, the pool box also contains the reward tokens to be emitted.

Once there are sufficient number of such tokens, an oracle can exchange or burn them in return for a reward. We also give a sample token exchange contract. 

### Refresh Mechanism 

In v1.0, the pool was refreshed by moving from the epoch-preparation phase to the live epoch phase. 
In v2.0, although there is a single pool box, the logic of pool refresh is stored in a separate box, the **refresh box**.
The refresh box is identified by a separate token, the *refresh-NFT*, which is referenced in the pool and oracle contracts.

### Update Mechanism 

The update mechanism is similar to that in v1.0. A threshold number (currently 6) of ballots must be cast for a proposed update. Such ballots are stored in a **ballot box** and identified by a **ballot token**. 
The ballot token holders and oracle token holders need not be the same people. 
The logic for updating the pool is stored in an **update box**, which identified by the **update-NFT**. This NFT is referenced in the pool and ballot boxes.
The ballot box allows the owner to vote for 3 things: 

1. The script of the new pool box.
2. The reward token id to be stored in the new pool box.
3. The reward token amounts to be stored in the new pool box.

Apart from this, the new pool box *must* preserve the remaining values from the old pool box.    

**Note** The update box logic acts on the pool box and not the refresh box.

## Tokens

The system has the following types of tokens. Note that we use the term **NFT** to refer to any token that was issued in quantity 1.

| Token | Issued quantity | purpose | where stored |
|---|---|---|---|
|Pool-NFT | 1 | Identify pool box | Pool box |
|Refresh-NFT | 1 | Identify refresh box | Refresh box |
|Update-NFT | 1 | Identify update box | Update box |
|Oracle tokens | 15 | Identify each oracle box | Oracle boxes |
|Ballot tokens | 15 | Identify each ballot box | Ballot boxes |
|Reward tokens | 100 million | Reward oracles | Pool box <br /> Oracle boxes |

## Boxes

There are a total of 5 contracts, each corresponding to a box type

| Box | Quantity | Tokens | Additional registers used | Purpose | Spending transactions |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Pool | 1 | Pool-NFT <br /> Reward tokens| R4: Rate (Long) <br /> R5: Epoch counter (Int) | Publish pool rate for dApps <br /> Emit reward tokens| Refresh pool <br /> Update pool | 
|Refresh| 1 | Refresh-NFT | | Refresh pool box | Refresh pool |
|Oracle | 15 | Oracle token <br /> Reward tokens | R4: Public key (GroupElement) <br /> R5: Epoch counter of pool box (Int) <br /> R6: Published rate (Long) | Publish data-point <br /> Accumulate reward tokens | Publish data-point, <br /> Refresh pool, <br /> Transfer oracle token, <br /> Extract reward tokens|
|Update | 1 | Update-NFT | | Updating pool box | Update pool box |
|Ballot | 15 | Ballot token | R4: Public key (GroupElement) <br /> R5: Update box creation height (Int) <br /> R6: New pool box hash (Coll[Byte]) | Voting for updating pool box | Vote for update <br /> Update pool box <br /> Transfer ballot token |

Before going into the transactions in the protocol, we first present the contracts for each of the above boxes.

## Contracts with base-64-encoded hash of ergo-tree bytes

- [Pool Contract](contracts/pool_contract.es) `8cJi+FGGU32jXyO8M2LeyWSWlerdcb1zxBWeZtyy7Y8=`
- [Refresh Contract](contracts/refresh_contract.es) `cs5c5QEirstI4ZlTyrbTjlPwWYHRW+QsedtpyOSBnH4=`
- [Oracle Contract](contracts/oracle_contract.es) `fhOYLO3s+NJCqTQDWUz0E+ffy2T1VG7ZnhSFs0RP948=`
- [Ballot Contract](contracts/ballot_contract.es) `2DnK+72bh+TxviNk8XfuYzLKtuF5jnqUJOzimt30NvI=`
- [Update Contract](contracts/update_contract.es) `pQ7Dgjq1pUyISroP+RWEDf+kVNYAWjeFHzW+cpImhsQ=`
Use this Scastie playground to calculate the above hashes - [https://scastie.scala-lang.org/hnTEm2lJQPG1wRYCqPz8LQ](https://scastie.scala-lang.org/hnTEm2lJQPG1wRYCqPz8LQ)
## Transactions

Oracle pool v2.0 has the following transactions.
Each of the transactions below also contain the following boxes which will not be shown.

1. Funding input box: this will be used to fund the transaction, and will be the last input.
2. Fee output box:  this will be the last output.
3. Change output box: this is optional, and if present, will be the second-last output.

| Transaction | Boxes Involved | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Refresh pool | Pool <br /> Refresh <br /> Oracles | Refresh pool box |
| Publish data point | Oracle | Publish data point |
| Extract reward tokens | Oracle | Extract reward tokens to redeem via external mechanism | 
| Transfer oracle token | Oracle | Transfer oracle token to another public key|
| Vote for update | Ballot | Vote for updating pool box |
| Update pool | Pool <br /> Update <br /> Ballots | Update pool box |
| Transfer ballot token | Ballot | Transfer ballot token to another public key|

None of the transactions have data-inputs.

### Refresh pool

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Pool | Pool |  
| 1 | Refresh | Refresh |  
| 2 | Oracle 1 | Oracle 1 |  
| 3 | Oracle 2 | Oracle 2 |  
| 4 | Oracle 3 | Oracle 3 |  
| ... | ... | ... |

The purpose of this transaction is to take the average of the rates in all the oracle boxes and update the rate in the pool box whenever the
epoch gets over (i.e., the current height is > creation height + epoch length).
We consider such a pool box to be *stale* that needs to be refreshed.

1. The first input is the pool box that simply requires the second input to be the refresh box (i.e., contain the refresh token) ([smart contract](#pool-contract)).
2. The second input is a refresh box that contains the following logic ([smart contract](#refresh-contract)):
   - The first input is a stale pool box, that is a box with the pool token and creation height lower than the current height minus epoch length.
   - This transaction can only be done by someone holding a oracle token and having published an oracle box (see below).
   - Any value published within the last epoch length by someone holding the oracle token is considered *latest*. This is called an oracle box.
     In particular, for the box to be considered an oracle box, the following must hold:
      - It must have an oracle token at index 0.
      - Register R4 must contain a group element.
      - Register R5 must be the current epoch counter (from R5 of the stale pool box).
      - Register R6 must contain a long value, which will be assumed to be the rate.
      - Its creation height must not be less than the current height minus epoch length.
   - There must be at least a certain number of oracle boxes (currently 4) as inputs.
   - The oracle boxes must be arranged in increasing order of their R6 values (rate).
   - The first oracle box's rate must be within 5% of that of the last, and must be > 0.
   - The first output must be a new pool box as follows:
      - Registers R0 (value), R1 (script), R2 (tokens) are preserved from the old pool box.
      - The creation height (stored in R3) must be at greater than or equal to the current height minus 4.
      - The rate (stored in R4) must be the average of the rates in all the oracle boxes.
      - The epoch counter (stored in R5) must be incremented by 1.
      - Registers R6 and onward are empty.
      - The quantity of the second token (reward) must be decremented by at most twice the number of valid rate boxes.
   - The second output must be a new refresh box as follows:
      - Registers R0 (value), R1 (script), and the first token (refresh NFT) are preserved from the old refresh box.
3. Each input oracle box has following logic ([smart contract](#oracle-contract)):
   - The first input is a pool box (i.e., has the pool token).
   - An output oracle box (acting as a copy of this box) must be created as follows:
      - The following values are directly copied: R0 (nanoErgs), R1 (script), the first token (oracle token) (stored in R2) and R4 (GroupElement).
      - The second token (reward token) is incremented by at least 1.

Suppose there are *n* valid oracle boxes, then there are 2*n* reward tokens released.   
It is expected that whoever creates the refresh transaction (the *collector*) takes *n*+1 reward tokens, and the other oracles get 1 token each.  
This gives incentive to use as many oracle boxes as possible during the refresh.

### Publish data-point

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Oracle | Oracle |  

This allows an oracle to publish data-point for collection in next epoch.
This entails spending the oracle box and creating a new oracle box as per the [smart contract](#oracle-contract).

1. The public key stored in R4 defines who can spend the oracle box.
2. The logic requires the new oracle box to be as follows:
   - The script and the first token are copied from this box.
   - R4 contains a group element.
   - The second token is the reward token in some non-zero quantity.
3. The following rules (not enforced by the smart contract) to be followed.
   - It should store the same group element in R4.
   - It should store epoch counter of the current pool box in R5.
   - It should store the rate to publish in R6.
   - It should ensure reward tokens are preserved.

### Extract reward tokens

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Oracle | Oracle |
| 1 |             | Box with freed reward tokens |

This allows an oracle to extract tokens obtained from publishing data point to redeem them elsewhere.

The transaction is similar to the [publish data-point](#publish-data-point) transaction, except that Step 3 is modified as follows.

3. The following rules (not enforced by the smart contract) to be followed.
   - It should store the same group element in R4.
   - It should keep at least 1 reward token.
   - It should store the balance reward tokens in some other box.


### Transfer oracle token

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Oracle | Oracle |  

This is used to transfer the ownership of an oracle token to another public key.

The transaction is similar to the [publish data-point](#publish-data-point) transaction, except that Step 3 is modified as follows.

3. The following rules (not enforced by the smart contract) to be followed.
   - It should store the new owner's group element in R4.
   - It should keep at least 1 reward token.
   - It should store the balance reward tokens, if any, in some other box.

### Vote for update

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Ballot | Ballot |  

This is used by ballot token holders to vote for updating the pool box address.

The input and output are ballot boxes such that the following holds as per the [smart contract](#ballot-contract):
- There is a group element in R4.

The following (not enforced by the contract) must be done for a proper vote:
- R5 of type `Int` contains the creation height of the current update box.
- R6 of type `Coll[Byte]` contains the hash of the address of the new pool box.
- R7 of type `Coll[Byte]` contains the reward token id for the new pool box.
- R8 of type `Int` contains the reward token amount for the new pool box.

### Update Pool box

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Pool | New Pool |  
| 1 | Update | Update |  
| 2 | Ballot 1 | Ballot 1 |  
| 3 | Ballot 2 | Ballot 2 |  
| 4 | Ballot 3 | Ballot 3 |  
| ... | ... | ... |

This updates the pool box (i.e., transfers the poolNFT to a new address).

The ballots used in inputs must satisfy the following as per the [smart contract](#ballot-contract):
- There must be an output ballot box with the same public key in R4 and rest registers empty.

The update box additionally ensures following as per the [smart contract](#update-contract):
- Each ballot box has R5 containing the hash of the new pool box script (address).
- Each ballot box has R6 containing this box's creation height.
- Each ballot box has R7 containing the new pool box's reward token id.
- Each ballot box has R8 containing the new pool box's reward token amount.
- The remaining registers (apart from creation height) and tokens in the old pool box are preserved in the new pool box.
- There is a copy of the update box in outputs with everything preserved but with larger creation height.
- There are at least a threshold number of votes.

We store the update box's creation height in the ballot's R5 to ensure that a vote is actually for the current update box.

#### Update Rules

In order to keep the [pool contract](#pool-contract) as compact as possible, many parameters are hard-wired in the [refresh contract](#refresh-contract). 
Depending on what is to be updated, we may need to update other items as well. In particular, the following rules apply:

| To update | Also must update | Can preserve |
|---|---|---|
|Pool params <br /> (like epoch length) | Refresh-NFT <br /> Refresh box | Reward tokens <br /> Update-NFT <br /> Update box  <br /> Ballot tokens <br /> Ballot boxes <br /> Oracle tokens <br /> Oracle boxes |
|Refresh-NFT | Refresh box | Reward tokens <br /> Update-NFT <br /> Update box  <br /> Ballot tokens <br /> Ballot boxes <br /> Oracle tokens <br /> Oracle boxes |
|Update-NFT | Update box <br /> Ballot tokens <br /> Ballot boxes  | Refresh-NFT <br /> Refresh box <br /> Reward tokens <br /> Oracle tokens <br /> Oracle boxes |
|Oracle tokens | Refresh-NFT <br /> Refresh box <br /> Oracle boxes <br /> | Reward tokens <br /> Update-NFT <br /> Update box <br /> Ballot tokens <br /> Ballot boxes |
|Reward tokens | Pool box| Refresh-NFT <br /> Refresh box <br /> Update-NFT <br /> Update box <br /> Ballot tokens <br /> Ballot boxes <br /> Oracle tokens <br /> Oracle boxes |
|Ballot tokens | Update-NFT <br /> Update box <br /> Ballot boxes | Refresh-NFT <br /> Refresh box <br /> Reward tokens <br /> Oracle tokens <br /> Oracle boxes |

After an update, the older versions of the boxes will be left for garbage collection via storage-rent, and their tokens will become free for miners to take.
Hence, it is beneficial to update all the related tokens anyway.


### Transfer ballot token

| Index | Input | Output |
|---|---|---|
| 0 | Ballot | Ballot |  

This is similar to the [transfer oracle token](#transfer-oracle-token) and [vote for update](#vote-for-update) transactions, except that it is used to transfer ownership of a ballot token to another public key.
